Starting a Career in
DATA
SCIENCE
Iliya Valchanov
Co-Founder and Instructor at 365 Data Science
Introduction by the Author
Over the past few years, I’ve received hundreds of messages from our students asking for career
advice. Some of them came from recent college graduates with no professional experience
looking to identify their career path options and make their first steps in the ever-expanding
data science field. Others came from tech industry professionals wondering how to hone their
transferable skills and land a job in business intelligence or data science. And others still – from
people working part- or full-time in a completely unrelated filed. The ones who study on a tight
schedule with admirable commitment to transferring into data science. At 365, we are dedicated
to helping all our students reach their data science goals, regardless of their background, work
experience, and field of expertise. And while our courses teach how to do data science, it’s the
career aspect of data science I’ve always felt compelled to address.
So, I wrote this guide for you, the aspiring data science professional. No matter where you are
in your career development, in these pages you’ll find the tools that will help you assess your
skills, explore your options, decide and act to pursue the best career choice for you. I’ve spoken
to experts, spent hundreds of hours reading the relevant literature, and, together with the 365
team, conducted research and analyses of the many job options available in data science. How
to get a job in data science? What are the top 5 data science career opportunities to explore?
Which data science industries you should consider? and Where to find data science positions?
These are just some of the questions we answer. This guide provides you with the roadmap you
need to design your career future from square one and maximize your transferable skills in data
science. It outlines the education and skills you need and, hopefully, illuminates your path to a
satisfying career.  And although each person’s experience is unique, these key points apply to
everyone.
I hope you’ll refer to this guide often and I welcome you to keep writing to us. We are here to
help you every step of the way as you progress through your data science career.
Iliya Valchanov
Co-Founder and Instructor at 365 Data Science
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
Of course, if you’re one step ahead and you already intend to become a data scientist, then
our online Data Science program is a great place to start.
You can preview the course (12 hours of video instruction) for free.
Is Data Science for Me?
We ourselves have asked the very same question when we were
at square one of our data science learning path. And we haven’t
forgotten that every expert was once a beginner. So, we created
this data science career guide with a three-fold purpose:
1. Show you why data science opportunities are worth exploring;
2. Inform you about the different careers in data science and boost
your efficiency in discovering suitable data science roles;
3. Prepare  you to pursue a career in data science.
Table of
CONTENTS
Why is data science a good career
to explore?
Why is data science important? .........6
Who can use data science? .................6
What are the top 5 data science
career opportunities to explore?
Data Scientist ......................................8
Data Analyst .............................................11
BI Analyst ..................................................14
Data Engineer ......................................17
Data Architect .....................................20
23	 What is the data science job
outlook?
Demand ........ ......................................24
Future of data science job ..................24
Job growth in data science ................24
25	  What data science qualifications
will get you on the path to success?
Education ............................................26
Skills ....................................................26
Certificates ..........................................26
27	 How to get a job in data science?
Resume tips .........................................27
Project portfolio advice ......................27
Interview questions ............................27
Internship opportunities .....................27
28	 Which data science industries you
should consider?
Finance and Insurance ........................29
Healthcare ...........................................29
Manufacturing .....................................29
30	 Types of organizations to
consider?
Consulting companies ........................30
Startups ...............................................30
Government jobs .................................30
32	 About the author
33 	Next steps
Why is data science
a good career to
explore?
Advancements in technology helped data science evolve from cleaning datasets
and applying statistical methods to a field that encompasses data analysis,
predictive analytics, data mining, business intelligence, machine learning, deep
learning, and so much more. Now, there still might be some who think that data
science is just a trend and the hype around it will eventually go away. Of course,
nothing could be farther from reality.
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
The truth is, data science is just gaining speed as all businesses
(and government organizations) use enormous volumes of data
to improve what they do and how they do it. But what makes data
science the magic ingredient for success? Here are two tangible
examples.
Formula 1
The Brazilian Grand Prix 2012. Red Bull’s Sebastian Vettel suffers
the worst possible start, his car spinning out of control and losing
its front wing on his opening lap. Vettel suddenly drops down to
last. All seems doomed for the champion. However, the German
somehow manages to recover and finish sixth, which grants him
just enough points to snatch the world title for the third year in a
row in the most dramatic fashion. Fierce driving or luck?
Nope. That’s data science.
Turns out, by the time Vettel made it to his 10-th lap pit stop, a team
of brilliant data engineers had already used modeled data to run
simulations. Thus, they were able to analyze what adjustments
were necessary to keep Sebastian’s Renault going for the remaining
70 laps. What a huge victory fueled by data!
Caesars Casino
Caesars Entertainment Corporation was the fourth-largest gaming
company in the world in 2013, with annual revenues of $8.6 billion.
Based in Nevada, US, it runs more than 50 hotels and casinos
around the world, some of them at the most lucrative locations in
Las Vegas.
But do you know what Caesar’s most valuable asset is?
It’s their database, giving indispensable insight into 45 million hotel
and casino customers’ behavior and spending patterns.
The corporation used 17 years of gathering information to build
“an automated, targeted marketing strategy for every individual
customer, using data to understand who they are, and then
predictive modeling to assess the best way to incentivize them to
spend money.” (Marr, 2016)
What does this mean in practice?
Well, if you’re a client with a high lifetime value that happens to
have lost all their luck, dignity, and money at the Blackjack table,
you’ll most certainly be approached by a staff member. They’ll
immediately lift your spirits by serving you your favorite drink. Or
they’ll hand you free tickets to an evening entertainment program,
and even offer you other free perks they know your heart desires.
That way, Caesar makes sure you’re happy and satisfied and keeps
you coming back for more.
Why is data science important?
Data science isn’t just restricted to the F1 racetrack or the big
casino business players. In fact, there is virtually no industry
that can’t benefit from it. Retail and e-commerce, logistics and
transportation, healthcare, finance, insurance, real estate – all these
need a strong data science team that can leverage the data within
their organization to gain a competitive advantage. That’s why, if
you’re looking for a rewarding career with a strong impact on any
business decision-making process, you should definitely explore
the data science career path.

You can. And your employer certainly can, too.
In fact, the latter will welcome you with open arms, once they
realize you’re brave and qualified enough to tame the tide of
unstructured, semi-structured, and structured data, and use data
insights to drive change. Of course, it goes without saying that
those changes should lead to measurable results. After all, every
company wants to ensure the well-being of their business, right?
Now, we want to help you be the person that every big data science
company or fast-growing startup would gladly hire on their team.
So, how do you get into the data science field? Fortunately, there
are numerous ways to do that. Some involve waltzing through the
impressive “Data Science Leviathan” door, whereas others help you
secure a career in data science through less demanding paths.
What are the top
5 data science
opportunities to
explore?
To help you sort things out, we’ve featured the top 5 in-demand types of data
science jobs – data analyst, BI analyst, data engineer, data architect, and, of
course, data scientist.
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
Who is a data scientist?
What does a data scientist do?
Practically everything. Data scientists have a strong curiosity and
a passion for achieving practical business impact. In addition, they
boast exceptional judgment combined with an analytical mindset.
But what sets apart the best from the rest is a knack for creative
problem solving and willingness to learn new technologies and
skills.
Why is that so important? Because data scientists must use
machine learning models to solve challenging problems in all
business areas. Moreover, they are real champions in utilizing
statistical natural language processing to mine unstructured data
and extract insights. Which doesn’t mean they don’t also deal with
structured data. In fact, it’s quite the contrary. Data scientists model
structured data with advanced statistical methods and algorithms
to perform analyses. Then, they interpret the results and visualize
the data to tell the most compelling stories to management and
stakeholders to achieve the company’s business goals.
Ever wondered how to become a data
scientist? Also known as the Data Science
Unicorn, a data scientist offers an unmatched
blend of skills, much to the satisfaction
of their employer. Data scientists not only
understand the language of data, but they
can also analyze it and draw actionable
insights from it. Moreover, they’ve mastered
the art of data storytelling to a level that
makes both management and stakeholders
nod in agreement and plan their strategy
accordingly.
How much does a data scientist earn?
How much do data scientists make? Here are the numbers,
according to Glassdoor and PayScale. As a data scientist in the U.S.,
even with zero experience, you can get a $10,000 annual bonus
on top of your $100,000 average annual pay. And, just in a few
years’ time, your earnings can increase to $118,000, plus $12,000 in
bonuses! You’ve set your gaze to London’s Big Ben and the UK? With
no previous experience as a data scientist, you can expect to earn
an average total compensation of £33,813. And once you have 1-4
years behind your back, your average total compensation will rise to
£39,573.
Overall, the data scientist career outlook is undeniably positive. No
wonder “data scientist” was coined the sexiest job out there!
What’s the data scientist career path?
You can start as data architects or data analysts, and gradually work
their way up to this coveted job. In any case, if you’re aiming at the
data scientist position, here’s everything you need to know to get
started on the right career track.
How to become a data scientist?
Everybody wants to know how to be a data scientist. Well, maybe
not literally everybody, but this is undeniably the most sought-after
career in the data science field at the moment, as the demand for
data scientists is constantly growing. Data scientists are independent
and impactful, and If you want to get hired as one, you’re probably
wondering what the data scientist duties are, how to acquire the
necessary skills to apply for data scientist positions and if the salary
will meet your expectations.
Is data scientist a good career? To save you browsing through job
boards and career websites to find the various information you need,
we created this ‘data scientist snapshot’. We believe it will give you
the insights you need to decide if the data scientist role fits your
career needs and aspirations.
•
Integrity and confidentiality;
•
Desire to drive innovation and generate unique solutions;
•
Growth mindset;
•
Ability to track and share external trends, best practices or
ideas;
•
Drive for performance;
•
Accountability;
•
Ability to thrive under pressure and fast pace;
•
Ability to take an unpopular stance.
Soft skills
•
Strong written and verbal communication skills
•
Leadership skills;
What education do you need to become a
data scientist?
For starters, you don’t need a Master’s or a Ph.D. degree to become
a data scientist. If you already have it – great! It’s certainly a plus!
However, a Bachelor’s degree is good enough to get you on the data
scientist path. According to our extensive research on how to be a
data scientist, a background in the following disciplines increases
your chances of landing a data scientist job:
•
Economics and social sciences, which includes economics,
finance, business studies, politics, psychology, philosophy,
history, and marketing and management;
•
Natural science, including physics, chemistry, and biology;
•
Statistics and mathematics;
•
Computer science;
•
Engineering;
•
Data science and analysis, which includes machine learning.
The good news is that even students from entirely different areas
of studies, hold a very good chance of becoming data scientists.
According to data from successful data scientists’ LinkedIn profiles,
43% have completed at least one data science online course with 3
certificates being the average.
So, if you’ve never written a line of code in your life, you can still
make up for it with determination and commitment to learning…
And ultimately start a career in data science.
What data scientist qualifications you
should acquire?
Data scientists are famous for their robust skillset and
competences. So, here are the must-have qualifications you
need to become a data scientist. But how can a single person
be outstanding in the technical domain, business acumen, and
interpersonal communication simultaneously? Well, it’s all about
acquiring the right skills
Technical skills
•
Excellent programming skills in R or Python and its data
science libraries (Pandas, scikit-learn);
•
Experience with relational databases and SQL;
•
Experience in MATLAB;
•
Advanced practical knowledge of data science and machine
learning /AI development frameworks;
•
Excellent analytical and learning skills;
•
Experience in Deep Learning frameworks (e.g. TensorFlow);
•
Experience with NLP algorithms is an advantage.
Practical skills
•
Ability to start initiatives;
•
Ability to develop and leverage relationships with stakeholders
to achieve a company’s business goals;
•
Ability to inspire others and support others’ development to
achieve full potential;
•
Readiness to collaborate with engineering and BI teams.
Well, now that you’ve got a good idea of what it’s like to be a data
scientist and how to become one, you should feel more confident
and determined on your path. However, if you feel you need
additional data scientist career tips and advice, just scroll down
the data science career guide. We’ve developed a special section
to resume tips, project portfolio advice, interview questions, and
internship opportunities. Furthermore, you’ll discover the most
promising industries and organizations hiring data scientists, along
with the best job boards for data science position. That said...
Complete Online Data Science
Training Program
Everything you need to become an
expert data scientist in months – from
the fundamentals of Mathematics,
Probability, Intro to Data & Data Science,
through Tableau, SQL, R, and Python, all
the way to Machine and Deep Learning.
Preview the Program for Free
Who is a data analyst?
What does a data analyst do?
Well, quite a lot. A data analyst is both a thinker and a doer who
doesn’t hesitate to roll up their sleeves and dig into the numbers.
Data analysts extract and analyze data with a “can do” approach
and then present data-driven insights to underpin decision making.
They also develop and build analytics models and approaches as
the basis for a company’s strategy and vision. On top of that, they
are often responsible for identifying and extracting key business
performance, risk and compliance data, and converting it into
easy-to-digest formats. So, as you can see, agility to shift between
strategic projects and operational activities a must.
Sounds a bit lonely? Think again. Data analysts are great team
players and work closely with various departments and leaders
within the organization. That’s super important if they want to
be effective in this role. So, the ability to communicate well and
influence is critical.
How much does a data analyst earn?
How much do data analysts make?
Glassdoor and PayScale were kind enough to share their insights.
If you’re taking the first steps in your data analyst career, you can
expect an average pay of $57,000.
As you reach 4-6 years of experience, your compensation will also
go higher ($68,000 median annual salary and an average bonus of
$4,705).
You’re based in the UK? The average compensation for data
analysts with less than 1 year of experience (including bonuses
and overtime pay) is £23,870. In terms of data analyst job growth, if
you already have 1-4 years of experience as a data analyst, you can
expect annual earnings of £25,853. So, it looks like the data analyst
path is worth exploring!
What’s the data analyst career path?
A budget analyst or a compensation and benefits analyst can be
a starting point to your data analyst career. But, in any case, if
you wish to advance on the data analytics career path, here’s all
you need to learn in terms of education and data analyst skillset
requirements.
How to become a data analyst?
Considering a career as a data analyst? That’s certainly a great
option to explore, both on its own and as a gateway into data
science. However, there are a few questions you need the answers
to if you want to make sure that a career in data analytics is the best
career path for you. So, this overview is designed to confirm the
fundamentals of data analytics careers for you: what a data analyst
does, what education is preferable or required, how to get into data
analytics, and what skills will get you hired. We also discuss what
salary you can expect over your data analyst career progression.
Effectively, this overview gives you the insight you need to make
up your mind and initiate the first steps towards a successful data
science career.
What education do you need to become a
data analyst?
If you consider becoming a data analyst, a Bachelor’s degree in IT,
computer science or statistics will give you a strong advantage.
However, equivalent experience in data and business analytics
Data analysts are the real troopers of data
science. They’re the ones who are involved
in gathering data, structuring databases,
creating and running models, and preparing
advanced types of analyses to explain
the patterns in the data that have already
emerged. A data analyst also overlooks the
basic part of predictive analytics.
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
“The good news is, even if
you lack the background and
the experience, you still have
good chance of getting a job
as a data analyst.”
Technical skills:
•
Programming and coding language skills using Python, R;
•
Expertise in SQL and a good understanding of how relational
database management systems work;
•
Tableau Experience with large data sets and distributed
computing;
•
Excellent Excel skills and ability to use advanced analytics
and formulas;
•
Experience with extracting and analyzing data from diverse
sources (multiple data marts and file formats);
•
Knowledge of statistics and statistical software packages,
quantitative methods, confidence intervals, sampling and
test/control cells;
•
Predictive modeling.
a successful career as a data analyst. But this just may be the best
way to achieve your goal. In most companies, you’ll be able to gain
valuable experience and take advantage of many in-house training
opportunities. So, the important thing is to stay curious and keep
on learning. Real-world experience, exposure to the latest software
programs, and communicating with experts in the field will expand
your knowledge and put you on the data analyst track.
What data analyst qualifications you
should acquire?
As a data analyst, you’ll have plenty of tasks to juggle on a daily
basis. So, here are the qualification and skills you need to become a
data analyst and handle all that data. And in order to be successful,
you should demonstrate a plethora of skills. That said, technical
expertise, a solution-oriented approach, and the ability to articulate
complex technical terms and concepts to a non-technical audience
are only part of the job requirements for a data analyst. Then,
there are also the soft skills (which are often the most challenging
to master). But don’t worry - we’ve  prepared an exhaustive list for
you.
also fit the bill. The good news is, even if you lack the background
and the experience, you still have a good chance of getting a job
as a data analyst. There are various ways to learn, such as taking
qualification courses or enrolling in a comprehensive online
training covering everything from statistics and Excel to SQL,
Python, and Tableau.
In fact, the latter will increase your chances to land an internship at
a high-profile company and build your career from the ground up.
Maybe an entry-level position isn’t how you imagined launching
At entry-level position may be the best way  to gain
real-world experience and gradually progress towards
your goal of a successful data analyst career.
Practical skills:
•
Strong attention to detail and ability to quality check your
own work to ensure data mistakes are caught prior to work
delivery;
•
Advanced analytical and data interpretation skills;
•
Ability to stay organized and deliver within agreed timeframe
and scope;
•
Hands-on, problem-solving skills;
•
Ability to initiate and drive projects to completion with mini-
mal guidance;
•
Ability to communicate the results of analyses in a clear and
effective manner;
•
Confidentiality and personal integrity (a key competency,
especially if your job requires managing sensitive data);
•
Confidence to challenge thinking and offer opinions, thou-
ghts, and insight;
•
Prioritization skills;
•
A proactive approach to resolving problems;
•
Quick learning skills.
Soft skills:
•
Excellent communication skills – both verbal and written;
•
Ability to articulate complex concepts;
•
Ability to collaborate effectively in any work environment;
•
Good listening skills.
Now you’re aware of the most important aspect of a data analyst
job. However, you still may need additional career advice on top
of the skills needed for data analyst. So, if you feel like you need
further preparation, you can jump to the later sections of the data
science career guide. We’re sure those will come in handy as a
quick reference once you start sending out application forms and
going to interviews.
If you want to broaden the scope of your
work as a data analyst and have more
impact, you need to  gain an in-depth
understanding of how business work and
how to apply data to reach practical business
solutions.
What does a BI analyst do?
Data is business and business is data. That’s probably every BI
analyst’s motto.
BI analysts possess a blend of business vision, consultant abilities
and profound understanding of data. Not to mention they are
fierce Tableau ninjas. Their job often requires work alongside senior
management to shape and develop a data strategy. Analysis of
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), accurate overview of business
performance and identifying areas that need improvement are all
in the BI analyst’s domain.
But that’s not all. Another part of a BI analyst’s job is to continually
improve their company’s competitive positioning. Therefore, they
examine their competitors, data trends, seasonality, and other
random effects to quickly identify issues and best practices.
On top of that, they create killer graphs and dashboards to review
major decisions and measure effectiveness. Do you want to have an
impact on the business world? Become a BI analyst!
How much does a BI analyst make?
How much do BI analysts make?
We found the answer in Glassdoor and PayScale.
If you’re new to the profession (with 1 year of experience or less),
you can count on $66,000 average pay. Once you’ve gained a few
years of experience and you’ve honed your persuasion skills, your
median annual pay can reach $79,000 (plus $5,185 average bonus).
Do you want to work in the UK? An entry-level BI analyst can expect
to earn an average total pay of £26,000. And, by all means, 1-4
years of experience will grant you an average total compensation
of £29,000. Sounds like advanced excel skills truly pay off in the end!
What’s the BI analyst career path?
If you want to pursue the business intelligence analyst career path,
you can first consider gaining some experience as a data analyst
or a business analyst. A BI analyst career has a lot to offer but you
definitely need some high-level skills. So let’s see what education
and qualifications will pave your way to success.
How to become a Business Intelligence
analyst?
Is the business intelligence career path right for you? Well, if you’re
interested in business performance, calculating KPIs and extracting
insights from past historical data, this might be an opportunity
worth looking into. However, a BI analyst has many other
responsibilities and tasks to complete daily. That’s why we created
this article - to provide insight into what a BI analyst does, what
education and skills you need to fit the bill, and how much you can
earn in this role. Practically, everything that will get you past those
first initial steps on your way to a new career.
What education do you need to become a
BI analyst?
Generally speaking, landing a job as a BI analyst should come
relatively easy, if you have a bachelor’s degree in one (or more)
of the following, computer science, engineering, mathematics,
Who is a BI analyst?
A BI analyst is the best friend of business
performance, focusing primarily on analyses
and reporting of past historical data. Once the
relevant data is in the hands of the BI Analyst
(monthly revenue, customer, sales volume,
etc.), they must quantify the observations,
calculate KPIs and examine the measures to
extract insights from their data.
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
BI analyst: top priority
Taking the business strategy into consideration.
This guarantees that the analytics a BI analyst
provides will ensure the competitive edge of the
company.
Median salary: USA
Entry level: $66,000
1-4 years of experience: $79,000 + $5,185 average
bonus
Median salary: UK
Entry level: £26,000
1-4 years of experience: £29,000..
statistics, finance, business administration, economics or
related field. But don’t get discouraged if your background is in
contemporary dance or Classical Indian literature.
Fortunately, there are no limits to learning. And it’s never late to
acquire the crucial skills for a BI analyst position, such as Excel,
SQL, Python, and Tableau. Today, there are plenty of specializations
and all-around online certificate courses that will give you the
knowledge and confidence required for the job.   And here’s a small
tip: if you’re new to the data science field, an internship in the
financial industry would be a great start. It will help you understand
all business processes. Plus, you’ll get an idea of the kinds of
projects a BI analyst undertakes.
What BI analyst Qualifications you
should acquire?
A data science job is all about the skillset, and the BI analyst path
makes no exception. So, here’s a list of skills you need to become
a BI analyst.
Technical skills:
•
Advanced SQL Skills;
•
Experience with Power BI;
•
Advanced Tableau Desktop and Server abilities;
•
Advanced Excel skills;
•
Programming skills (Python or R are highly desirable);
•
Data interpretation and recommendations based on findings;
•
Development of graphs, dashboards, reports, and presenta-
tions of project results;
•
Identification, analysis, and interpretation of trends or pat-
terns in complex data sets.
Practical skills:
•
Strong planning and organization skills
•
Learning concepts quickly, and applying them to come up
with creative solutions;
•
Analytical skills;
•
Impeccable attention to detail,
•
Ability to work independently in a fast-paced and rapidly
changing environment;
•
Presentation skills;
•
Ability to design rich data visualizations and dashboards to
communicate complex ideas to business partners and leader-
ship;
•
Ability to persuade;
•
Flexibility and adaptability.
Soft skills:
•
Excellent verbal and written communication skills.
•
Ability to work well as part of a team in a high pressure, agile
environment;
•
Ability to collaborate with Performance Management to
understand and analyze data on individual and team perfor-
mance;
•
Willingness to assist and coach other project teams when
required;
•
Fast in understanding what other people need.
So, now you know what to expect from a BI analyst job and what
you need to aim for it. However, some extra career insights are
always desirable. So, if you’re motivated to expand your know-how,
you can continue to the career-focused sections down the data
science career guide. We’re certain they will be a helpful companion
on your way to a successful data science career.
The BI analyst skillset
Excellent communication and presentation skills are
just as important as degrees and technical competences.
What does a data engineer do?
Data engineers are the Jedi Knights of data science. They rely on a
blend of analysis, wisdom, experience, and judgment to make key
decisions for a company’s success. A data engineer is a self-starter
who is inspired to complete more than your usual number of tasks.
But what does that mean? Let’s briefly go over some of the things a
data engineer does. Data engineers implement complex, large scale
big data projects with a focus on collecting, managing, analyzing
and visualizing large datasets. All that massive amount of overwhel-
ming raw data? Well, they are the ones turning it into insights using
various toolsets, techniques, and cloud-based platforms. Data en-
gineers are responsible for building and maintaining ETL pipelines
which make crucial data accessible for the entire company. They
also lend a helping hand to BI analysts by designing and supporting
BI platforms. Who makes sure all big data applications are available
(and performing properly)? Again, data engineers. And, to top it all,
they are great team-players. A data engineer knows how to actively
collaborate with data scientists and executives to build solutions
and platforms that meet, or even exceed a company’s business
needs.
How much does a data engineer earn?
How much do data engineers make? We asked Glassdoor and
PayScale to give you the answer. In the U.S., the average pay for a
data engineer who’s just getting started in his career is $103,000.
Who is a data
engineer?
Interested in big data career opportunities?
Data engineers are the ones to take things
further up the data science pipeline. They
use the data architects’ work as a steppings-
tone and then preprocesses the available
data. They are the people who ensure the
data is clean and organized and ready for the
analysts to take over.
Of course, once you hit the 4-6 years’ experience mark, you can ex-
pect your compensation to rise to $117,000 (plus, you’ll be eligible
for additional bonuses in the region of $10,000).
Looking for a data engineer job in the UK? According to PayScale
research, even if you have less than 1-year experience, you can get
average pay of £30,000 (this includes bonuses and overtime pay).
Naturally, with experience comes a higher salary. A data engineer
with 1-4 years of experience earns an average total compensation
of £41,000. And it only gets better! Once you have 5-9 years of expe-
rience, your annual pay can hit £54,000. Big data, big rewards!
What’s the data engineer career path?
If you’re excited about big data career opportunities, this career
path could be the one for you. A developer’s or software enginee-
ring experience can be the gateway to a data engineer’s job. But
what if you’re new to the field and you’re not sure you’ve got what
it takes to get there? Don’t worry. Here are the education and quali-
fications that will open the door to a data engineer career.
“Data engineers test large-scale
processing systems, develop
processes for data modeling,
and recommend ways to
increase data efficiency.”
Data Engineer: top priority
Building and maintaining ETL pipelines which
make crucial data accessible for the entire
company
Median salary: USA
Entry level: $103,000
4-6 years of experience: $117,000
Median salary: UK
Entry level: £30,000
1-4 years of experience: £41,000
5-9 years of experience: £54,000
What education do you need?
A degree in software engineering, computer science, or information
technology will give you a flying start. However, if that’s not the
case, you can still make the cut. But you need skills in computer
programming and software design, statistical modeling and regres-
sion analysis, Python, SQL, and Machine learning. Now, before you
rush into writing off your dream job, you should know that acqui-
ring these skills is absolutely possible, even for complete beginners.
All you have to do is enroll in a qualification program or commit to a
comprehensive data science training. Once you follow the curricu-
lum and gain experience with real-world exercises and projects, you
will have the skills, confidence, and the portfolio to apply for a data
engineer position.
How to Become a data engineer?
The data engineer path is one of the best choices you can make if
you’re driven to succeed in the data science field.
But how to become a data engineer?
This overview will help you learn about the responsibilities of a
data engineer, the education requirements, the skills you need to
acquire (or just sharpen, if you have previous experience) and the
expected salary of a data engineer in the U.S. and the UK.
What data engineer qualifications you
should acquire?
A data engineer job comes with certain responsibilities. Here’s a
list of competences and skills you need to become a data engineer
who knows their stuff.
Technical skills:
•
Knowledge of data modeling for both data warehousing and
Big Data;
•
Experience in the Big Data space (Hadoop Stack like M/R,
HDFS, Pig, Hive, etc.);
•
Ability to write, analyze, and debug SQL queries;
•
Experience with at least one scripting language (e.g. Python);
•
Mathematics;
Practical skills:
•
Data visualization skills (make Tableau your best friend);
•
Analytical skills;
•
Ability to make sound decisions, even in the absence of com-
plete information;
•
Ability to follow through on commitments and make sure
others do the same;
•
Personal responsibility for decisions, actions, and failures;
•
Establishment of clear processes for monitoring work and
measuring results;
•
Design of feedback loops into work;
•
Strong attention to detail;
•
Ability to think critically and conceptually.
Soft skills:
•
Very strong communication skills in a variety of settings.
Well, now you’re in-the-know about what it’s like to be a data en-
gineer and how to get there. Of course, better preparation means
higher chances of success. So, if you want to gain more useful
insight into your future career options, you can find our resume
and portfolio tips in the later sections of the data science career
guide. We believe they will give you the information you need to
make the first steps into a rewarding data science career.
What about machine learning engineers?
Well, if you want to tread the machine learning career path, you’ll
certainly need solid knowledge of machine learning theory and
understanding of deep learning. However, both aren’t exactly
entry-level positions. So, if you want to pursue a data mining career,
or land a job machine learning, you can start off with learning the
fundamentals of software engineering and gradually build your way
up through careers in big data.
Author’s note:  Some of you may wonder what
the differences between a data engineer, a data
mining engineer, and a machine learning engi-
neer are. Although they’re all in the realm of data
science engineering, these roles all have specific
responsibilities that distinguish them from the rest.
Data engineers are typically more focused on
back-end solutions and data sources integration.
Data mining engineers, on the other hand, are
also involved in developing models to extract ac-
tionable insights from a data set
“A data engineer knows how
to actively collaborate with
data scientists and executives
to build solutions and platfor-
ms that meet, or even exceed
a company’s business needs.”
A data engineer must have a highly
technical mindset, be in the know about
current and emerging technologies, and
thrive as a collaborative team player.
Learn Data Science from experts.
Preview the training
Who is a data architect?
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
If you’ve seen the 1999 cult movie The Matrix,
you probably recognize the Architect as the
creator of the utopian world for human minds
to inhabit. Much like their blockbuster coun-
terpart, data architects create the database
from scratch. They design the way data will
be retrieved, processed, and consumed.
What does a data architect do?
Do you have an analytical and creative mind? Are you a problem
solver, driven by curiosity and excitement to build complex
database systems? Then you might be perfect for a career as a
data architect. Data architects are technical experts who adapt
dataflow management and data storage strategy to a wide range
of businesses and solutions. They’re in charge of continually
improving the way data is collected and stored. Furthermore, data
architects control the access to data (all you corporate spies out
there – now you know who to look for). Data architects are also
responsible for design patterns, data modeling, service-oriented
integration, and business intelligence domains. They often part-
ner with fellow data scientists and IT guys to reach the company’s
data strategy goals.
A data architect constantly seeks out innovations to provide
improved data quality and reporting, eliminate redundancies, and
provide better data collection sources, methods, and tools.
How much does a data architect earn?
According to Glassdoor’s salaries report, the average annual
pay for entry-level data architects in the U.S. is approximately
$104,000, while professionals with 4-6 years of experience make
more than $125,000 (and can easily get bonuses in the region
of $10,000 a year). What about the UK? As a data architect early
in your career, you can earn an average total compensation of
£45,000. However, a mid-career Data Architect with 5-9 years of
experience can get as much as £55,000 (including bonus and over-
time pay). So, you’re in for solid growth!
What’s the data architect career path?
If you want to go into the data architect realm, first you should
know what education and qualifications will help you get there.
How to Become a Data Architect?
If you’ve set your data science career goals in that direction, we
have two things to say.
First off– great choice! The data architect role is on the rise with its
increasing importance for enterprises and their business success.
And, second – this article is the right place to start, as it gives you
a succinct overview of everything you need to make the first bold
steps on the data architect career track. You will learn about the
responsibilities of the data architect job, the education requi-
rements, the necessary skills, and the salary you can expect at
various stages of your data architect career.
What education do you need to become a
data architect?
If you want to become a data architect, a Bachelor’s degree in
information systems, computer science, engineering, or related
field will definitely give you a competitive edge. But don’t be quick
to despair if you’ve studied something entirely different. It turns
out, these are by no means prerequisites to get the job. According
to LinkedIn job offers, employers are much more interested in
Data architects design powerful database models and
implement solutions to store and retrieve company
data in an effective way.
relevant work experience than in shiny degrees. In their own words,
“Bachelor`s degree in Computer Science is desirable, but will waive
this requirement entirely if you have significant and applicable
real-world experience.” So, how can you get there? Well, first of
all, master Python or R, SQL, Tableau, and gain experience in data
modeling and machine learning. The good news is, you can build
up your knowledge from scratch with some additional qualification
courses or by enrolling in an online certificate data science training.
What data architect qualifications you
should acquire?
Here are the qualifications and skills you need to become a data archi-
tect that truly stands out.
Technical skills:
•
Strong data modeling skills;
•
Database architecture;
•
Data warehousing experience;
•
Data governance know-how;
•
Experience with Python or R;
•
Experience with SQL;
•
Good command of data visualization tools (e.g. Tableau);
•
Knowledge of data retention concepts and practices;
•
Automation of data flows and integrations.
•
Understanding of XML and Java.
Practical skills:
•
Ability to lead multiple, highly complex efforts simultaneously;
•
Establishment and implementation of standards and guidelines;
•
Ability to determine key architecture solutions that meet perfor-
mance, scalability, reliability, and security needs;
•
Research and evaluation of emerging data management techno-
logies for applicability and adoption;
•
Ability to present technical concepts to upper-level management
and officers;
•
Ability to work independently;
•
Strong problem - solving skills;
•
Strong attention to detail.
Soft skills:
•
Strong communication skills;
•
Provision of technical leadership and guidance to the project
team as appropriate.
Now you know what it takes to become a data architect. However,
some useful career tips are never too much. So, if you want to take
your job preparation to the next level, just scroll down the data
science career guide. We believe the information on employment
opportunities we’ve provided will help you with the first steps into a
successful data science career.
Data architects are responsible for creating
secure frameworks for databases that can
serve the needs of hundreds or thousands of
people.
What’s the Data
Science job outlook?
Data science is an ever-evolving field, as technologies change quickly. Therefore,
you should be prepared that any data science job will require continuous lear-
ning and development of competences and skills
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
What’s the Demand for Data Science Pro-
fessionals?
We understand that before you invest all the time and effort into
a new data science career, you would want to know if the data
scientist job outlook (or any other data science and analytics job
outlook) is positive enough to guarantee you secure occupation
and future growth.
So, to put your Shakespearean doubts to rest, we decided to dig
into the numbers. We used data and insights from the extensive
joint research performed by IBM, Burning Glass Technologies, and
Business-Higher Education Forum (BHEF) -  The Quant Crunch: How
The Demand For Data Science Skills Is Disrupting The Job Market.
Here’s everything you need to know about the data science career
outlook in a nutshell.
What’s the future of data science jobs?
According to the report, by 2020 the number of data science and
analytics job listings is estimated to grow by nearly 364,000 listings
to about 2,720,000 openings. In fact, there is a serious concern that
the data science skill gap will continue widening and the supply
of data scientist and data analytics career talent won’t be able to
catch up to the industries` demand. Therefore, now is literally the
best time to become a data science specialist.
What’s the future of data science jobs?
Indeed, the future of data scientists and data engineers is brighter
than ever. According to the report, they are the jobs most likely to
suffer from supply shortages, along with BI analysts and other data
science, analytics, and system developer positions. Moreover, the
data indicates this tendency will continue to be strong for the years
to come.
What’s the job growth in data science?
Once again, we can say that the only way is up when it comes
to data science and analytics jobs. As the study shows, the skills
projected to grow the fastest include advanced analytical compe-
tencies, such as data science, machine learning, tableau, big data,
data visualization. Of course, skills in SQL, data analysis, financial
analysis, data management, mathematics, data warehousing, SQL
Server, database administration, business intelligence, and ETL
firmly remain among the most demanded analytics skills.
All things considered, the law of supply and demand indicates the
data science job outlook is more than optimistic (and so should be
you in pursuing your data science career goals).
Data scientists are key figures for business growth
As the demand for data science skills is booming, more
employers than ever are looking to hire data science
talents in their teams.
What data science
qualifications will
get you on the path
to success?
To help you sort things out, we’ve featured the top 5 in-demand types of data
science jobs – data analyst, BI analyst, data engineer, data architect, and, of
course, data scientist.
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
What are data scientists made of?
According to research, academics may gradually give
way to real-world, industry-relevant experience.
Education
Let’s call a spade a spade - the path to data scientist success invol-
ves a good amount of studying. And, although data science pros
come from different backgrounds, there are certain academic areas
that will make your entry into data science easier. Those include
computer studies, economics, finance, business studies, statistics,
and mathematics. Nevertheless, our research shows these are not
prerequisites to land a data science job. With that said, you can
make up for lost college time by instead gaining the skills required
by data science employers.
Skills
Now, whether you choose the role of data scientist, data analyst, or
data mining engineer, there’s a basic skill set you must acquire in
order to be competitive in the data science job market:
•
Excel proficiency;
•
Statistics knowledge;
•
Maths understanding (specifically calculus and algebra – the
subfields that are heavily employed in data science);
•
Good command of programming languages, such as SQL,
Python, and R;
•
Ability to work with visualization tools (e.g. Tableau);
•
Machine learning and deep learning fundamentals.
But how do you master all of these if you’re starting from scratch?
Fortunately, there is more than one way to learn data science. For
instance, you can enroll in a qualification program or study with
private tutors. However, if going back to school is not an option, an
online certificate program can be the best start of your professional
journey.
Certificates
According to The Data Scientist Profile 2019 (research based on
1,001 LinkedIn profiles), 43% of data scientists boast at least 1
online course in their resume, with 3 certificates being the average.
Furthermore, those include even graduates of prestigious univer-
sities! And that is quite an accurate indicator of the importance of
self-preparation and a proactive approach towards a data science
career.
“Fortunately, there is more
than one way to learn data
science.”
In addition to education and technical skills,
a data scientist needs a solid business
acumen, in order to identify and solve the
business problem at hand.
How to write a data science resume?
They say you only have 3 seconds to make a great first impression.
And you can be sure that applies to your job resume, especially in
the super-competitive field of data science. A well-thought-out and
carefully designed resume isn’t just a pass to a job interview. As
a matter of fact, it can pre-determine what questions you will be
asked during the interview, and, ultimately, whether you’ll get the
welcome-to-the-company handshake. So, if you want to create an
outstanding resume that will present you in the best light, you can
check out our pro tips and data science resume recommendations.
We believe those will prove useful in your job application process.
How to build a data science project
portfolio?
While a resume matters, your data science career prospects heavily
depend on your project portfolio. Why? Because it’s the real-life
proof of what you can do. And that’s what potential employers look
for when scouting for data science talent. So, how can you build a
project portfolio if you lack previous experience in the field? Here’s
what you can do.
School projects. Those are a good place to start. However, school
projects are the fruit of teamwork and solutions are provided in the
end. So, usually, you don’t get to choose the project and you can’t
truly showcase your individual talent. It is good practice, to begin
with, mostly because there’s always someone you can approach
with a question. But overall, it is far better to include personal
projects in your portfolio;
Personal projects. This is where you show what your data science
dreams are made of. Personal projects truly set you apart from the
rest and demonstrate that you’re serious about getting into data
science. Just find a problem you’d like to solve, collect the neces-
sary data, and apply your data science skills to find the solution.
Course projects. If you’re enrolled in an online data science certifi-
cate course, you’ll have the chance to build a portfolio by comple-
ting the larger hands-on projects at the end of the course sections.
Volunteer work. Although work pro-bono isn’t for everyone, some
free-of-charge projects for a company or an NGO can do wonders
for your data science portfolio. Such experience will add extra
points to your resume and will boost your data science skills.
How to prepare for a data science inter-
view?
Data science interviews comprise tons of topics! There are coding
and machine learning questions, statistics and mathematics tasks,
case study scenarios… Not to mention the background check and
behavioral questions that you can’t possibly escape. As always,
preparation is key. So, if you want to know what to expect from a
data science job interview, you can read more on the subject in our
resource Data Science Interview Questions. We believe it will help
you maximize your chances to land the job you desire.
How to get a data science internship?
Internships are a great steppingstone that will boost your chances
for a successful career in the long run. As an intern, you will not only
hone your practical data science skills but will also be able to work
on a variety of projects. And, as we mentioned above, the latter is a
deal-maker when you apply for a data science job. Is data scientist a
good job? An internship at a high-profile company will give you the
answer. So, if you want to explore the data science opportunities
you’ll get as an intern,  learn more in our article How to Get a Data
Science Internship.
How to get a job in
data science?
If you’ve come this far down the article, it’s
safe to say you’re serious about data scien-
ce as a career. So, without further ado, let’s
briefly go through the job application steps
that will get you where you want to be.
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
Which data science
industries you
should consider?
Where do data scientists work? As it turns out, everywhere! The data
boom creates demand for data scientist roles across an ever-growing
variety of industries. From Finance and insurance, through Agriculture and
Forestry, to Construction – every organization needs solid data science
skills to exploit their data and gain a competitive edge. So, what type of
data scientist would you like to be? Here are 3 top industries consider.
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
Finance and Insurance
Finance and Insurance is, in fact, the industry with the highest
demand for unique data science and analytics talent. But what
distinguishes a financial data scientist? Their experience and finan-
cial domain knowledge. So, if you want to earn the title financial
data scientist, you should definitely be in-the-know about finan-
cial markets, portfolio management, risk analysis, profitability,
delinquency, and closure, among other concepts. Now, you have to
keep in mind that this is not a job you land without a few years of
experience in the field. However, if you start as a financial analyst,
study hard, and keep your eyes on the prize, you can certainly work
your way up to the coveted financial data scientist position.
Healthcare
According to a study published in the Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association (JAMIA), the healthcare industry’s
demand for skilled data scientists is increasing, along with the
growing quantity and importance of big data in health care. Big
data is the key to discovering innovative solutions and improving
the quality of care. At the same time, it can lead to greater efficien-
cy, thus reducing healthcare expenditures. That said, it comes as no
surprise that the primary data science skills expected from a health-
care data scientist are: “statistics, R, machine learning, storytelling,
and Python.” (Note that this summary is based on the job posting
research sample.) Of course, gaining some prior experience as a big
data scientist in any other industry will certainly open the door to a
data science career in healthcare.
Manufacturing
Have you heard about Oden Technologies? This startup company
has developed a revolutionary Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
platform that helps manufacturers optimize their processes and
see how the changes they make affect their production in real-time.
And that’s just one example of how data science is becoming an
indispensable factor for the success of present-day manufacturers.
AI-powered industrial robots, product development, and computer
vision monitoring systems are bound to become more common.
Which makes perfect sense: they increase quality and thus bring
more benefits to the companies. Therefore, if you’re looking for
great career opportunities in the long run, manufacturing is defini-
tely an industry you should pay attention to.
And one last thing! If you want to
become a healthcare data scientist, don’t
forget honing your data mining skills.
This is a specific prerequisite for data
science healthcare jobs, as much of the
unstructured clinical data is in note format.
Learn SQL, Python, and R
Preview the training
Types of
organizations to
consider?
When browsing data scientist job openings,
it’s important to be in-the-know about the
types of data science organizations, what
they offer, and if they ultimately suit your ca-
reer needs. After all, you don’t want to spend
hours researching data center careers, when
there are plenty other great options out there.
Data science consulting companies
Data science consultancies offer outstanding remuneration
packages and development opportunities. In fact, if you’re on the
career path for data scientist, you shouldn’t sell yourself short. On
the contrary – start researching the top companies in the field. This
will tell you if a big consultancy is the right environment for you.
Author’s note: If you want to learn more about the big players,
you can read our article about the Top 15 Data Science Consulting
Companies Hiring Now.
Data science startups
Startups give you the chance to face challenges independently and
wear multiple hats. Working in a startup can help you grow your
skillset tremendously in a relatively short period of time. This rings
especially true if you compare it to working in large corporations
where it may take years of repetitive tasks before you climb up the
data science ladder.
Government data science jobs
Although this may not be the most popular career choice, an
increasing number of countries realize the importance of data
driven innovation and the socio-economic benefits that it can bring.
For example, in their project the U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit, the
U.S. Federal Government has developed a catalog of more than 200
digital tools to boost climate resiliency. And that certainly indicates
a positive outlook for data science careers, most prominently data
analysis careers, careers in data analytics, and careers in big data
analytics.
So, how to get a data science job for the government? As a first step,
you can visit the following government jobs directories:
USA JOBS – if you’re based in the U.S. and you want to explore a
wide scope of data science hiring paths;
The UK – The U.K. government is also recruiting top-notch data
science talent (make sure you check for job openings in the Office
for National Statistics, the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, and
the Cabinet Office);
GovtJobsPortal – Although finding a government data science job
in India is challenging, there are plenty of IT and computer science
positions that can be a great entrance to future data science job
openings.
Now that you’re aware of the data science employment options,
types of data scientists, roles, career paths, and job outlook, you’re
equipped with all the knowledge you need to take the first step on
your data science career journey.
However, there’s one more thing to keep in mind – anything
worthwhile takes time and hard work. So, keep learning and
improving your skills, don’t stay still, master different technologies,
and opportunities for a career in data science will show up.
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
With this guide, we aimed to shed light on
everything related to starting a career in data
science. We went all the way from exploring
the most lucrative data science job roles out
there, through listing the qualifications and
skills you need to become a competitive
data science professional, to assisting
you in making the first confident steps in
your job search process. We hope it helps
you broaden your perspective. Moreover,
we’re positive it will assist you not only in
understanding how to be a data scientist, but
also in choosing the best career path to enter
the data science field.
Final piece of advice? Learn with curiosity
and optimism. And don’t be afraid of making
mistakes along the way.  Just work hard,
always do your best, and the rest will follow!
CONCLUSION
365 Data Science has helped more than 300,000 people launch and advance a career in data science.
Iliya is the co-founder of 365 Data Science. He’s a Finance graduate with a strong quantitative background
who chose the exciting path of a startup entrepreneur. Iliya is the author of our online courses in
Mathematics, Statistics, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning. Iliya has demonstrated a formidable affinity
for numbers since childhood, winning more than 90 national and international awards and competitions
through the years. He first started teaching at university while he was helping other students with their
statistics and econometrics studies (his first happy students).
Now, Iliya has authored and instructed 5 online courses (and counting!) and he’s happy to share his
expertise in data science with all aspiring professionals in the field
About The Author
Starting a Career in Data Science: Ultimate Guide
Ready to take the next step?
365 Data Science offers a complete online data science training program
with expert instructors that is fun, interactive and beginner friendly. The
course covers fundamentals (Mathematics, Probability, and Statistics) going
through programming languages (Python, R, SQL) and finishing off with
state-of-the-art Machine and Deep Learning.
You can try the course (12 hours of video instruction) for free.
Preview the Training